docs: add rolldown chapter (#19680)
vitejs/vite: docs/guide/rolldown.md

# Rolldown Integration

Vite is planning to integrate [Rolldown](https://rolldown.rs), a Rust-powered JavaScript bundler, to improve build performance and capabilities.

## What is Rolldown?

Rolldown is a modern, high-performance JavaScript bundler written in Rust. It's designed as a drop-in replacement for Rollup, aiming to provide significant performance improvements while maintaining compatibility with the existing ecosystem.

Rolldown focuses on three key principles:

- **Speed**: Built with Rust for maximum performance
- **Compatibility**: Works with existing Rollup plugins
- **Developer Experience**: Familiar API for Rollup users

## Why Vite is Migrating to Rolldown

1. **Unification**: Vite currently uses esbuild for dependency pre-bundling and Rollup for production builds. Rolldown aims to unify these into a single, high-performance bundler that can be used for both purposes, reducing complexity.

2. **Performance**: Rolldown's Rust-based implementation offers significant performance improvements over JavaScript-based bundlers. While specific benchmarks may vary by project size and complexity, early tests show promising speed increases compared to Rollup.

> For additional insights on the motivations behind Rolldown, see the [reasons why Rolldown is being built](https://rolldown.rs/about#why-we-are-building-rolldown).

Author: ```suggestion
For additional insights on the motivations behind Rolldown, see the [reasons why Rolldown is being built](https://rolldown.rs/guide/#why-rolldown).
```

Using the "new" page for it as /about will be gone in a bit.

> 4. **Additional Features**: Rolldown will provide features like improved chunk splitting and better support for Vite's development and production workflows.

Author: You mean *instead* of the content or in addition? I was also wondering how much duplicates we want in the Vite docs regarding the "why"

> 4. **Additional Features**: Rolldown will provide features like improved chunk splitting and better support for Vite's development and production workflows.

Author: Okay, then I will leave the first two in and add a "read more" link 👍🏻

  }
}
```

```json [pnpm]
{
  "pnpm": {
    "overrides": {
      "vite": "npm:rolldown-vite@latest"
    }
  }
}
```

```json [Bun]
{
  "overrides": {
    "vite": "npm:rolldown-vite@latest"
  }
}
```

:::

After adding these overrides, reinstall your dependencies and start your development server or build your project as usual. No further configuration changes are required.

## Known Limitations

While Rolldown aims to be a drop-in replacement for Rollup, there are features that are still being implemented and minor intentional behavior differences. For a comprehensive list, please refer to [this GitHub PR](https://github.com/vitejs/rolldown-vite/pull/84#issue-2903144667) which is regularly updated.

## Reporting Issues

Since this is an experimental integration, you may encounter issues. If you do, please report them in the [`vitejs/rolldown-vite`](https://github.com/vitejs/rolldown-vite) repository, **not the main Vite repository**.

When [reporting issues](https://github.com/vitejs/rolldown-vite/issues/new), please follow the issue template and provide:

- A minimal reproduction of the issue
- Your environment details (OS, Node version, package manager)

> - Any relevant error messages or logs

Reviewer: @sapphi-red do you think it is valuable to have a Rolldown Vite discussion in the main Vite repo to gather feedback? Thinking on general feedback (even things like "it worked great!) that may be lost if we only link to the issues tracker here.

@TheAlexLichter it could be a good moment to also plug the Rolldown discord in this section.

Author: Excellent idea, will add a comment regarding the Discord 👍🏻
